=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-types - show the content types provided by a desktop application

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-types> [I<options>] [--] I<APPID> [...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-types> takes one or more arguments.  For each of its arguments, it
prints to standard output the full path of the desktop entry that would
have been launched when this argument had been supplied to
L<xdg-launch(1)>.  It does this by searching for a desktop entry in the
appropriate sub-directories of the C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>,
C<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>, C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_HOME> environment
variables using the same algorithms as L<xdg-launch(1)>.

For each desktop entry, it also prints to standard output an indented
list of the mime types supported by the desktop entry, one mime type per
line.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xdg-types>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Used by B<xdg-types> to determine the user's home directory.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-types> to determine the user's XDG data directory.  This
defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.  The F<applications> (or
F<xsessions>) subdirectory under this directory is the first searched to
locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-types> to determine the system XDG data directories.
This defaults to F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.  The F<applications>
(or F<xsessions>) subdirectory under these directories are searched in
order to locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-types> to determin the user's XDG configuration directory.
This defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.  The F<autostart> subdirectory under
this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry files.  See
the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-types> to determine the system XDG configuration
directories.  This defaults to F</etc/xdg>.  The F<autostart>
subdirectory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-types> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xdg-which(1)>,
L<xdg-whereis(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
