=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-which - show the full path of XDG desktop entries

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-which> [I<options>] [--] I<APPID> [...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-which> takes one or more arguments.  For each of its arguments, it
prints to standard output the full path of the desktop entry that would
have been launched when this argument had been supplied to
L<xdg-launch(1)>.  It does this by searching for a desktop entry in the
appropriate subdirectories of the C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>,
C<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>, C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_HOME> environment
variables using the same algorithms as L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=over

=item I<APPID>

Specifies the application identifier of an XDG desktop application to
locate.  The application identifier, I<APPID>, can be one of the
following:

=over

=item 1.

the name of a desktop entry file without the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim>); the name may contain a C</> if it is specified relative to a
user or system application directory, in which case it must not start
with a C</> or C<.>.

=item 2.

the name of a desktop entry file with the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim.desktop>); the same restrictions as (1), above, apply; or,

=item 3.

the full path (absolute or relative) and filename of a desktop entry
file (e.g.  F</usr/share/applications/gvim.desktop>); the full path must
contain at least one C</> and start with either a C</> or a C<.>.

=back

Providing a non-option application identifier argument is mandatory
unless the B<--exec> or B<--appid> options are specified.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-which>.
B<xdg-which> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to match the I<APPID> and provide output.  When any of
the following options are specified, the command mode changes:

=over

=item B<-l>, B<--list>

Output list of effective lookup paths that B<xdg-which> is using.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-X>, B<--xsession>

Treat I<APPID> as an C<XSession> identifier instead of an C<Application>
identifier.

=item B<-U>, B<--autostart>

Treat I<APPID> as an C<Autostart> identifier instead of an
C<Application> identifier.

=item B<-a>, B<--all>

Print all matching desktop entries, not just the first.

=item B<--skip-dot>

Skip directories in C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> that start
with a dot.

=item B<--skip-tilde>

Skip directories in C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> that start
with a tilde and entries that reside in C<XDG_CONFIG_HOME> or
C<XDG_DATA_HOME>.

=item B<--show-dot>

If a directory starts with a dot and a matching desktop entry was found
for that path, then print "./appid.desktop" rather than the full path.

=item B<--show-tilde>

Output a tilde when a directory matches the C<HOME> directory.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xdg-which>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Used by B<xdg-which> to determine the user's home directory.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-which> to determine the user's XDG data directory.  This
defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.  The F<applications> (or
F<xsessions>) subdirectory under this directory is the first searched to
locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-which> to determine the system XDG data directories.
This defaults to F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.  The F<applications>
(or F<xsessions>) subdirectory under these directories are searched in
order to locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-which> to determin the user's XDG configuration directory.
This defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.  The F<autostart> subdirectory under
this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry files.  See
the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-which> to determine the system XDG configuration
directories.  This defaults to F</etc/xdg>.  The F<autostart>
subdirectory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-which> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
