=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-find - find desktop entries by criteria

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-find> [I<options>] [--] I<TYPE> [...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-find> takes one or more arguments.  For each of its arguments, it
locates all desktop entries of the specified types and lists them on
standard output.  It does this by searching for a desktop entry in the
appropriate sub-directories of the C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>,
C<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>, C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_HOME> environment
variables using the same algorithms as L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=over

=item I<TYPE>

Specifies the type of application for which to show or set I<APPID>
as the preferred application.  The application type, I<TYPE>, can be one
of the following:

=over

=item 1.

A recognized XDG category name.  For recognized XDG category names, see
L</XDG CATEGORIES>.

=item 2.

A mime (content) type.  All mime types have a C</> in their names and
are thus distinguished from XDG categories.  The content type cannot
contain wild cards (i.e. it cannot contain C<*>).

=back

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-find>.
B<xdg-find> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations of
long options and long options with a single dash are are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to find all desktop entries of the type or types
specified, I<TYPE>.  When any of the following options are specified,
the mode changes:

=over

=item B<-l>, B<--list>

Output list of effective lookup paths that B<xdg-find> is using.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-X>, B<--xsession>

Also find applications that are C<XSession> entries instead of
just C<Application> entries.

=item B<-U>, B<--autostart>

Also find applications that are C<Autostart> entries instead of
just C<Application> entries.

=item B<-A>, B<--application>

Also find applications when B<--xsession> or B<--autostart> options are
specified.

=item B<-a>, B<--all>

Print all matching desktop entries, not just the first.

=item B<-e>, B<--desktop> I<DESKTOP>[;I<DESKTOP>[...]]

Exclude entries that are not to be included in the semi-colon separated
list of desktop environments, I<DESKTOP>, specified.

=item B<-n>, B<--nodisplay>

Exclude entries that are not be be shown in menus.  That is, they have
the C<NoDisplay> key field set to B<true>.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Following are some examples of invocation and output:

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xdg-find>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Used by B<xdg-find> to determine the user's home directory.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-find> to determine the user's XDG data directory.  This
defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.  The F<applications> (or
F<xsessions>) sub-directory under this directory is the first searched to
locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-find> to determine the system XDG data directories.
This defaults to F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.  The F<applications>
(or F<xsessions>) sub-directory under these directories are searched in
order to locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-find> to determin the user's XDG configuration directory.
This defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.  The F<autostart> sub-directory under
this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry files.  See
the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-find> to determine the system XDG configuration
directories.  This defaults to F</etc/xdg>.  The F<autostart>
sub-directory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-find> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

I can likely be considered a bug that B<xdg-find> does not provide any
other criteria on which to search other than supported mime type and
XDG category.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xdg-which(1)>,
L<xdg-whereis(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
