=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-xsession - an XDG compliant XSession startup notification launcher

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-xsession> [I<OPTIONS>] [I<APPID>|I<COMMAND>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-xsession> is a script that simply executes L<xdg-launch(1)> with
the appropriate arguments (B<--xsession>).
See L<xdg-launch(1)/COMMAND OPTIONS> for more information.

=head1 FILE FORMAT

There are two formats for the F<.desktop> file of type B<XSession>:

=over

=item 1.

An entry for a window manager that may or may not be capable of being
launched under multiple session managers.

=item 2.

An entry for a session manager that may or may not include optional
window managers.

=back

Detecting between the two can be performed fairly reliably on the basis
of examining the I<XSession> desktop entry keys and values.

=head2 GROUPS

=head3 [Desktop Entry]

=over

=item B<Standard Keys>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following standard keys:

=over

=item B<Type>

This required key specifies the type of the desktop entry.  The standard
type for application desktop entry files is B<Application>.  The
L<Desktop Entry Specification> dictates that unrecognized types are to
be ignored.

The non-standard type for X session desktop entry files is B<XSession>.
This key is normally set to B<Application> when the desktop entry file
may also reside in applications directories.

The non-standard type for auto-start desktop entry files is
B<Autostart>.  This key is normally set to B<Application> when the
desktop entry file may also reside in applications directories.

KDE specifies additional non-standard types that are typically ignored
by all but KDE applications and utilities.

=item B<Version>

This optional key specifies the version of the L<Desktop Entry
Specification> to which the remainder of the file conforms.  The current
version is I<1.1>.  The current version is backward compatible with
version I<1.0>.  There are backward incompatibilities between pre-1.0
files and file of version I<1.0> and later.  This key is, therefore,
only really necessary when identifying a pre-1.0 (e.g. I<0.9>) file
version.

Unless a file is a pre-1.0 version, this key is normally omitted.

As there are no standard versions for B<XSession> or B<Autostart> files,
this key is normally omitted in those files.

=item B<Name[]>

This required key specifies the name of the entry.

=item B<GenericName[]>

The optional generic name of the entry (e.g. B<Window Manager>).

=item B<NoDisplay>

This optional key, when set to I<true> indicates that the entry should
not be displayed in the menus.  The key is normally only included to set
it to I<true>.  This is often for application that perform some other
function (such as an XSession or Autostart entry, one that just sets its
MimeType, etc.).

For X sessions and auto-start entries, this key is ignored by the x
session and auto-start launcher, as it is primarily for use in
applications sub-directories only.

=item B<Comment[]>

This optional key provides a longer description of the application:
still normally only consuming one line of text.

=item B<Icon>

This optional key specifies an icon name for the desktop entry.  The
icon name should not have an extension, and should not contain a path;
however, many applications recognize both extension and path.  Where
only an extension is specified and not a path, the application typically
restricts the selection of icon to one with the same extension as that
specified.  Where a path is specified, it is normally only used to
specify an icon that resides outside the normal search paths for icons.

=item B<Hidden>

This optional key is normally only included when specified as I<true>.
It is used to occlude entries is search path sub-directories with a
lower priority than the one in which the F<.desktop> file resides.

=item B<OnlyShowIn>

Specifies an exclusive list of desktops in which the application is
shown in the menus.

This entry is meaningless for X sessions, as the current XDG desktop has
not yet been set.  This entry is also meaningless for many auto-start
entries, especially those that start before the current desktop is set.

=item B<NotShowIn>

Specifies and exclusion list of desktop for which the application is not
shown in the menus.

This entry is meaningless for X sessions, as the current XDG desktop has
not yet been set.  This entry is also meaningless for many auto-start
entries, especially those that start before the current desktop is set.

=item B<DBusActivatable>

=item B<TryExec>

This optional key typically contains the absolute path and file name of
a binary executable that must exist for the desktop entry to be
considered valid.  It is often specified when the B<Exec> key does not
contain the primary binary executable in the first word of the command.
It may also be specified without a path, in which case the B<$PATH>
environment variable is used to search for the executable as would
L<which(1)>.  This key is not shell word expanded by the application.

=item B<Exec>

=item B<Path>

=item B<Terminal>

Specifies that the application is to be started as the executed command
of a terminal (e.g. I<xterm -e>).

=item B<Actions>

=item B<MimeType>

=item B<Categories>

This optional key specifies a list of categories for the entry.

B<XSession> entries have this key set to
I<WindowManager;System;Applications;>.

B<Autostart> entries can set this key to give hints to the session
manager as to when the auto-start entry should be launched.  These hints
are:

=over

=item I<Panel>

=item I<TrayIcon>

=item I<SystemTray>

=item I<DesktopPager>

=item I<Dock>

=item I<DockApp>

=item I<WindowManager>

=item I<CompositeManager>

=back

=item B<Implements>

=item B<Keywords>

=item B<StartupNotify>

Provides a tri-state boolean value and specifies whether the desktop
entry supports startup notification completion.  This key should be
specified as I<false> when it is known that the application does not
perform startup notification and does not map any window (regardless of
the setting of the B<StartupWMClass> key); I<true>, when it is known
that it will perform startup notification completion when invoked with a
B<DESKTOP_STARTUP_ID> environment variable set; and, not present when it
is unknown whether the desktop entry supports startup notification or
not.

When used in an X session file, this property refers to the window
manager or session launched.  A session manager interpreting this key
when set to I<false> in the X session file, or when not specified and
the B<StartupWMClass> and B<X-GNOME-WMName> class are not set, should
the session manager or auto-start dispatcher send a I<new:> message when
launching the window manager, it should not await a I<remove:> message
and should send one itself on appearance of a window manager.  Should it
send a I<new:> message in such cases, the I<new:> message should contain
the I<SILENT=1> parameter.

When this key is not present and the B<StartupWMClass> or
B<X-GNOME-WMName> keys are present, the window manager launcher should
await the appearance of an EWMH check window with the appropriate class
or name before sending the I<remove:> message.  Any sent I<new:> message
should not contain the I<SILENT> parameter.

=item B<StartupWMClass>

If specified, it is known that the application will map at least one
window with the given string as its WM class or WM name hint.
L<xdg-launch(1)>, when B<Terminal> is set to I<true>, will use this
value to have the terminal populate the I<res_class> portion of the
B<WM_CLASS> property on the terminal, and this value in all lower-case
to populate the I<res_name> portion of the B<WM_CLASS> property on the
terminal.  See L<XGetClassHint(3)>.

=back

=item B<Deprecated Keys>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following deprecated standard
keys:

=over

=item B<Encoding>

This key is deprecated.  Its only currently valid value is I<UTF-8>.
This key should be ignored by current applications.

=item B<MiniIcon>

Was used with the I<%m> expansion for B<Exec> strings.  Used to expand
to I<--miniicon [MiniIcon]>, where, I<[MiniIcon]> is the value of the
B<MinIcon> key.

=item B<TerminalOptions>

Was used to supply additional terminal options when the B<Terminal> key
was set to I<true>.  Not used in B<XSession> or B<Autostart> entries.

=item B<Protocols>

=item B<Extensions>

=item B<Extensions>

=item B<BinaryPattern>

=item B<MapNotify>

=item B<SwallowTitle>

A locale string that specified the title of the window if it is
swallowed onto the panel.

=item B<SwallowExec>

A string that specified the program to execute if the swallowed
application was clicked.

=item B<SortOrder>

Was used to specify sorting order for menus: other mechanisms are used
currently.

=item B<FilePattern>

=back

=item B<Non-Standard Keys>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following non-standard, but
widely accepted, keys:

=over

=item B<DesktopNames>

This optional key is only used in B<XSession> files.  It specifies the
contents of the B<$XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP> environment variables, to be set
when the session is launched.

Although this key is non-standard, the L<Desktop Entry Specification>
gives it a glancing reference.  It can also be seen in many B<XSession>
entry files in the wild.

=item B<GenericComment[]>

=item B<MultipleArgs>

=item B<X-MultipleArgs>

=item B<Patterns>

=item B<SingleInstance>

=item B<AsRoot>

An optional boolean value that, when I<true>, specifies that the B<Exec>
key is to be executed as root (e.g. with L<sudo(1)>, or another root
privileges command).

=item B<AutostartPhase>

The same as B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Phase>, below under L</GNOME
Extensions>.

=item B<AutostartCondition>

A variation of the B<X-KDE-Autostart-condition> key.  Provides a complex
mechanism for specifying the conditions that must prevail before an
auto-start entry is considered for launching.  Only applicable to
auto-start entries.

=item B<X-DBUS-ServiceName>

=item B<X-DBUS-ServiceType>

=item B<X-DBUS-StartupType>

=item B<X-DCOP-ServiceType>

=item B<X-DCOP-StartupType>

=item B<X-Desktop-File-Install-Version>

=item B<X-DocPath>

Another name for the widely used B<DocPath> key.

=back

=item B<GNOME Extensions>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following C<GNOME> extension
keys:

=over

=item B<X-GNOME-AutoRestart>

This optional extension key is only included when set to I<true>.  It
indicates that the application should be restarted should it exit with a
non-zero exit status or terminate on a signal.  Naturally, the session
launching this application must not restart it too rapidly.  This
functionality could be achieved by applications with X11R6 Session
Management instead, but it is often used as an indication to
light-weight window managers that a startup application needs to be
restarted in this fashion, and so is a reasonable extension.  It mostly
applies to X sessions and auto-start entries.

=item B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Notify>

This optional extension key is only included when set to I<true>.  It
indicates that the application will use the B<DESKTOP_STARTUP_ID>
environment variable as the session client identifier to register with
an X11R6 Session Manager, so that the session manager may pass
coordinate auto-start activities.  It mostly applies to auto-start
entries, and potentially window manager X session entries.

=item B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Phase>

This optional key is mostly applicable to auto-start entries and some X
session entries.  Not normally used with X session files unless the X
session file specifies only a window manager, in which case, the
auto-start phase must be set to B<WindowManager>.  Also not normally
used with application files unless they also specify an auto-start
entry.

When this optional key is present, it specifies the auto-start phase,
which may be one of:

=over

=item B<PreDisplayServer>

The first phase of normal startup (startup controlled by F<.desktop>
files rather than session manager code).  It covers the possible
installation of files in F<$HOME> by some initial setup programs and
must be done before other components use those files.  Not normally used
in XDG auto-start.  Auto-start applications with this phase set likely
also have B<StartupNotify> set to false and B<StartupWMClass>
unspecified (as they do cannot map windows).

=item B<Initialization>

Covers low-level stuff like settings helpers, that need to be running
very early (before any windows are displayed).  Some examples would be
merging F<.Xresources> files with L<xrdb (1)>.  Setting up F<.Xmodmap>
files with L<xmodmap(1)>, and executing the shell scripts in
F</etc/X11/xinit/xinitrd.d/> and B<$HOME>F</.xinitrc.d`>.

Examples are setting up canberra GTK modules, importing the B<$DISPLAY>
and B<$XAUTHORITY> environment variables into L<systemd(8)> and also the
DBUS activation environment.  F<.desktop> files are seldom used instead
of scripts for these functions.  One exception is the pusle audio X11
integration.

=item B<WindowManager>

Includes window managers and compositing managers, and anything else
that has to be running before any windows are mapped.  L<xdg-launch(1)>
also interprets this as the phase necessary to set up docks, slits or
harbours for dock apps.

=item B<Desktop>

Includes anything that draws directly on the desktop (e.g.
backgrounder).  L<xdg-launch(1)> also interprets this as the phase
necessary to set up desktop layouts for desktop pagers.

=item B<Panel>

Includes anything that permanently takes up screen real estate (via EWMH
struts).  This is the first phase where things actually appear on the
screen.  L<xdg-launch(1)> also interprets this as the phase necessary to
set up system trays for status icons.

=item B<Application>

Sometimes called B<Applications> (with the C<s> on the end).  This is
everything else.

=back

=item B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Delay>

This optional key is normally only specified when set to a non-zero
number of seconds.

=item B<X-GNOME-Bugzilla-Bugzilla>,
      B<X-GNOME-Bugzilla-Component>,
      B<X-GNOME-Bugzilla-Product>,
      B<X-GNOME-Bugzilla-Version>,
      B<X-GNOME-Bugzilla-OtherBinaries>,
      B<X-GNOME-Bugzilla-ExtraInfoScript>

These keys are ignored by most tools other than C<GNOME> tools.

=item B<X-GNOME-WMName>

For B<XSession> entries, specifies the name that will be placed on the
window manager check window.  Note that this may also now be specified
with the B<StartupWMClass> key for the window manager.

=item B<X-GNOME-WMSettingsModule>

For C<GNOME>, specifies the window manager settings module to be used by
L<gconf(1)>.  Not useful for other desktops.

=item B<X-GnomeWMSettingsLibrary>

For C<GNOME>, specifies the window manager settings library to be used by
L<gconf(1)>.  Not useful for other desktops.

=item B<X-GNOME-FullName[]>

An optional locale string that can be used to specify a longer name for
the application.

=item B<X-GNOME-Keywords>

Old name for the now standard B<Keywords> key.

=item B<X-GNOME-Provides>

Specifies the capability that the application, auto-start entry or X
session provides.  Typical values (that may be combined into a
semi-colon separated list) are:

=over

=item I<filemanager>

=item I<login-sound>

=item I<panel>

=item I<screen-keyboard>

=item I<screen-magnifier>

=item I<screen-reader>

=item I<windowmanager>

=back

These values may be combined into a list: for example, it is common to
see "I<panel>;I<windowmanager>;" as a value.  By far the most common use
of this key is to identify in an B<XSession> entry that the entry
provides a window manager.

=item B<X-GNOME-DocPath>

Another name for the widely used B<DocPath> key.

=item B<X-GNOME-Autostart-enabled>

The B<Hidden> key is not completely satisfactory for use in enabling or
disabling auto-start entries.  Therefore, this optional extension key
may be used to enable or disable an auto-start entry that is not hidden.
Both L<xdg-launch(1)> and L<xde-session(1)> respect this key.  When
absent on an auto-start entry that is not hidden, the default value of
this key is I<true>, instead of I<false> (as is the case for most keys).

L<xdg-launch(1)> handles this key when performing session startup by
setting the B<Hidden> key to the inverse of this boolean value when it
is present and the launch type is B<Autostart>.

=item B<X-GNOME-Autostart-startup-id>,
      B<X-GNOME-Autostart-discard-exec>

These two extension keys are used by L<gnome-session(1)> to save session
state for auto-start entries with B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Notify> set to
true.  They should never appear in XDG directories.

=back

=item B<KDE Extensions>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following C<KDE> extension
keys:

=over

=item B<DocPath>, B<X-KDE-DocPath>

Another name for the widely used B<DocPath> key.

=item B<InitialPreference>, B<X-KDE-InitialPreference>

=item B<Keywords>, B<X-KDE-Keywords>

Old name for the now standard B<Keywords> key.

=item B<ServiceTypes>, B<X-KDE-ServiceTypes>

=item B<X-KDE-StartupNotify>

This key was used before the B<StartupNotify> key was standardized.  It
has similar semantics to the standard B<StartupNotify> key.

=item B<X-KDE-autostart-condition>

=item B<X-KDE-autostart-after>

This optional key is used to further order auto-start entries that start
in the C<KDE> auto-start phase I<2> (I<Applications>).  All auto-start
applications in C<KDE> phase I<2> start after the window manager.
Typical values seen in the wild are:

=over

=item I<panel>

Auto-start the entry after the panel has already started up.
This is roughly equivalent to the C<GNOME> auto-start phase just after I<Panel>.

=item I<kdesktop>

Auto-start the entry after the desktop has already started up.
This is roughly equivalent to the C<GNOME> auto-start phase just after I<Desktop>.

=back

=item B<X-KDE-autostart-phase>

When present, specifies the auto-start phase for an auto-start entry.
This is an integer value that can have one of the following values:

=over

=item I<0>

Roughly corresponds to the I<PreDisplayServer> C<GNOME> auto-start
phase.

=item I<1>

Roughly corresponds to the I<Initialization> C<GNOME> auto-start
phase.

=item I<2>

Roughly corresponds to the I<Applications> C<GNOME> auto-start
phase.

=back

This key only applies to auto-start entries.  The default value if not
present is the I<Applications> phase (I<2>).

=item B<X-KDE-AuthorizeAction>

=item B<X-KDE-BrowserView-Args>

=item B<X-KDE-ExtraNativeMimeTypes>

=item B<X-KDE-FactoryName>

=item B<X-KDE-HasReadOnlyMode>

=item B<X-KDE-HasTempFileOption>

=item B<X-KDE-Library>

=item B<X-KDE-ModuleType>

=item B<X-KDE-NativeMimeType>

=item B<X-KDE-Protocols>

=item B<X-KDE-RootOnly>

=item B<X-KDE-StartupNotify>

This key was used before the B<StartupNotify> key was standardized.  It
has similar semantics to the standard B<StartupNotify> key.

=item B<X-KDE-SubstituteUID>

=item B<X-KDE-UniqueApplet>

=item B<X-KDE-Username>

=item B<X-KDE-WindowManagerId>

=item B<X-KDE-WindowManagerConfigure>

=item B<X-KDE-WindowManagerRestartArgument>

=back

=item B<MATE Extensions>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following C<MATE> extension
keys, that correspond to the equivalent C<GNOME> extension keys:

=over

=item B<X-MATE-AutoRestart>

The same as the B<X-GNOME-AutoRestart> key, except for C<MATE>.  See
B<X-GNOME-AutoRestart>, above.

=item B<X-MATE-Autostart-Notify>

The same as the B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Notify> key, except for C<MATE>.
See B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Notify>, above.

=item B<X-MATE-Autostart-Phase>

The same as the B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Phase> key, except for C<MATE>.  See
B<X-GNOME-Autostart-Phase>, above.

=item B<X-MATE-Bugzilla-Bugzilla>,
      B<X-MATE-Bugzilla-Component>,
      B<X-MATE-Bugzilla-Product>,
      B<X-MATE-Bugzilla-Version>

These keys are ignored by most tools other than C<MATE> tools.

=item B<X-MATE-Provides>

The same as the B<X-GNOME-Provides> key, except for C<MATE>.  The only
values I have seen for C<MATE> are:

=over

=item I<panel>

=item I<windowmanager>

=back

See B<X-GNOME-Provides>, above.

=item B<X-MATE-WMName>

The same as the B<X-GNOME-WMName> key, except for C<MATE>.  See
B<X-GNOME-WMName>, above.

=item B<X-MATE-WMSettingsModule>

The same as the B<X-GNOME-WMSettingsModule> key, except for C<MATE>.
See B<X-GNOME-WMSettingsModule>, above.

=item B<X-MateWMSettingsLibrary>

The same as the B<X-GnomeWMSettingsLibrary> key, except for C<MATE>.
See B<X-GnomeWMSettingsLibrary>, above.

=back

=item B<XFCE Extensions>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following C<XFCE> extension
keys:

=over

=item B<X-XFCE-Binaries>

=item B<X-XFCE-Category>

=item B<X-XFCE-Commands>

=item B<X-XFCE-CommandsWithParameter>

=item B<X-XFCE-MimeType>

=back

=item B<SuSE Extensions>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following C<SuSE> extension
keys:

=over

=item B<X-SuSE-YaST-RootOnly>

=item B<X-SuSE-translate>

=back

=item B<LightDM Extensions>

The I<Desktop Entry> group may contain the following C<LightDM>
extension keys:

=over

=item B<X-LightDM-DesktopName>

=back

=back

=head3 [Desktop Action ACTION]

The I<Desktop Action> group is not used in B<Autostart> entries.

The I<Desktop Action> group may contain the following standard keys:

=over

=back

=head3 [Window Manager]

The B<Window Manager> group is a non-standard group, but is one which is
supported by a number of session managers.  It may contain the following
keys:

=over

=item B<SessionManaged>

=item B<StartupNotification>

=item B<ConfigExec>

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-xsession> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
