=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-list - list desktop entry files

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-list> [I<options>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-list> locates desktop entry files for auto-start, x-sessions, or
applications and lists them.

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-list>.
B<xdg-list> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to list desktop files for applications and provide
output.  When any of the following options are specified, the command
mode changes:

=over

=item B<-l>, B<--list>

Output list of effective lookup paths that B<xdg-list> is using.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-X>, B<--xsession>

List desktop entries (sorted by application id) in the x-sessions
directory instead of the applications directory.

=item B<-U>, B<--autostart>

List desktop entries (sorted by application id) in the auto-start
directory instead of the applications directory.

=item B<-a>, B<--all>

Print all matching desktop entries, not just the first.

=item B<--skip-dot>

Skip directories in C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> that start
with a dot.

=item B<--skip-tilde>

Skip directories in C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS> and C<XDG_DATA_DIRS> that start
with a tilde and entries that reside in C<XDG_CONFIG_HOME> or
C<XDG_DATA_HOME>.

=item B<--show-dot>

If a directory starts with a dot and a matching desktop entry was found
for that path, then print "./appid.desktop" rather than the full path.

=item B<--show-tilde>

Output a tilde when a directory matches the C<HOME> directory.

=back

The default is to list files (sorted by application id) in the
applications directory.

=head1 OUTPUT

The format of the output depends on whether B<xdg-list> is operating in
list mode or normal mode, as follows.

=head2 LIST OUTPUT

When run in B<--list> mode, B<xdg-list> prints the full path of
directories associated with auto-start, x-sessions, or applications
depending on the settings of other options.  The directories are printed
one per line in search order.  Note that for applications, B<xdg-list>
will also list fallback directories in addition to applications
directories.

An example follows:

 $> xdg-list -l -U
 /home/brian/.config/autostart
 /etc/xdg/xde/autostart
 /etc/xdg/autostart


=head2 NORMAL OUTPUT

When run in application, auto-start or x-session modes, B<xdg-list> will
collect all of the desktop file by application id in accordance with XDG
specifications.  It will then print the list, one application per line,
sorted by application id.  On each line, the application id is printed
first, immediately followed by a colon C<:> and one space, followed by
the full path of the F<.desktop> file associated with the application
id.  Note that all application ids are printed: the F<.desktop> file is
not checked for any fields that would suppress their display on a
launcher, session manager or display manager.

An example follows:

 $> xdg-list -U
 at-spi-dbus-bus: /etc/xdg/autostart/at-spi-dbus-bus.desktop
 at-spi-registryd: /etc/xdg/autostart/at-spi-registryd.desktop
 deja-dup-monitor: /etc/xdg/autostart/deja-dup-monitor.desktop
 dhcpcd-gtk: /etc/xdg/xde/autostart/dhcpcd-gtk.desktop
 eekboard-autostart: /etc/xdg/autostart/eekboard-autostart.desktop
 gnome-settings-daemon: /etc/xdg/autostart/gnome-settings-daemon.desktop
 gsettings-data-convert: /etc/xdg/autostart/gsettings-data-convert.desktop
 icewmtray: /etc/xdg/xde/autostart/icewmtray.desktop
 pulseaudio: /etc/xdg/autostart/pulseaudio.desktop
 smproxy: /etc/xdg/xde/autostart/smproxy.desktop
 vboxclient: /etc/xdg/autostart/vboxclient.desktop
 zeitgeist-datahub: /etc/xdg/autostart/zeitgeist-datahub.desktop

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xdg-list>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Used by B<xdg-list> to determine the user's home directory.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-list> to determine the user's XDG data directory.  This
defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.  The F<applications> sub-directory
under this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry
files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more
information.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-list> to determine the system XDG data directories.
This defaults to F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.  The F<applications>
sub-directory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-list> to determin the user's XDG configuration directory.
This defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.  The F<autostart> sub-directory under
this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry files.  See
the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-list> to determine the system XDG configuration
directories.  This defaults to F</etc/xdg>.  The F<autostart>
sub-directory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-list> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<whereis(1)>,
L<xdg-which(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
