=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-whereis - locate desktop entry files for an application id

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-whereis> [I<options>] [--] I<APPID> [...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-whereis> locates the desktop entry, binary, source and manual
files for the specified application identifiers.  The supplied names are
first stripped of leading path-name components and any (single) trailing
extension of the form F<.ext> (for example: F<.c>).  B<xdg-whereis> then
attempts to locate the desired entry in the standard Linux places, and
in the places specified by C<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>, C<XDG_DATA_DIRS>,
C<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>, C<XDG_DATA_HOME>, C<PATH> and C<MANPATH>.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=item I<APPID>

Specifies the application identifier of an XDG desktop application to
locate.  The application identifier, I<APPID>, can be one of the
following:

=over

=item 1.

the name of a desktop entry file without the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim>); the name may contain a C</> if it is specified relative to a
user or system application directory, in which case it must not start
with a C</> or C<.>.

=item 2.

the name of a desktop entry file with the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
C<gvim.desktop>); the same restrictions as (1), above, apply; or,

=item 3.

the full path (absolute or relative) and filename of a desktop entry
file (e.g.  F</usr/share/applications/gvim.desktop>); the full path must
contain at least one C</> and start with either a C</> or a C<.>.

=back

Providing a non-option application identifier argument is mandatory
unless the B<--exec> or B<--appid> options are specified.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-whereis>.
B<xdg-whereis> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to match the I<APPID> and provide output.  When any of
the following options are specified, the command mode changes:

=over

=item B<-l>, B<--list>

Output list of effective lookup paths that B<xdg-whereis> is using.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-X>, B<--xsession>

Treat I<APPID> as an C<XSession> identifier instead of an C<Application>
identifier.

=item B<-U>, B<--autostart>

Treat I<APPID> as an C<Autostart> identifier instead of an
C<Application> identifier.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xdg-whereis>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Used by B<xdg-whereis> to determine the user's home directory.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-whereis> to determine the user's XDG data directory.  This
defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.  The F<applications> subdirectory
under this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry
files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more
information.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-whereis> to determine the system XDG data directories.
This defaults to F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.  The F<applications>
subdirectory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-whereis> to determin the user's XDG configuration directory.
This defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.  The F<autostart> subdirectory under
this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry files.  See
the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-whereis> to determine the system XDG configuration
directories.  This defaults to F</etc/xdg>.  The F<autostart>
subdirectory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-whereis> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
