=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-show - show startup notification and launch events

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-show> [I<options>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-show> is a diagnostic program that monitors F<freedesktop.org>
startup notification and provides diagnostics and information about the
startup notification transactions and their handling by window managers.
It is meant really as a debugging tool for developing applications and
window managers that support startup notification.

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-show>.
B<xdg-show> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is monitor startup notification and provide output.  When
any of the following options are specified, the command mode changes:

=over

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose> [I<LEVEL>]

Print diagnostic information to standard error during operation.  This
option can be repeated to increase the verbosity of output.  The default
level is 1.

=item B<-D>, B<--debug> [I<LEVEL>]

Prints debugging information to standard error during operation.  This
option can be repeated to increase the debugging level.  The default
level is 0.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xdg-show>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Used by B<xdg-show> to determine the user's home directory.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-show> to determine the user's XDG data directory.  This
defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.  The F<applications> (or
F<xsessions>) subdirectory under this directory is the first searched to
locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-show> to determine the system XDG data directories.  This
defaults to F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.  The F<applications> (or
F<xsessions>) subdirectory under these directories are searched in order
to locate desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file
specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Used by B<xdg-show> to determine the user's XDG configuration directory.
This defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.  The F<autostart> subdirectory under
this directory is the first searched to locate desktop entry files.  See
the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for more information.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Used by B<xdg-show> to determine the system XDG configuration
directories.  This defaults to F</etc/xdg>.  The F<autostart>
subdirectory under these directories are searched in order to locate
desktop entry files.  See the XDG Desktop Entry file specification for
more information.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-show> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<http://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: sw=4 tw=72 nocin
