=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-toolwait - an XDG compliant xtoolwait utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-toolwait> [I<OPTIONS>] [I<APPID> [I<FILE>|I<URL>]]

B<xdg-toolwait> [I<OPTIONS>] -c I<command and arguments>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-toolwait> is a script that simply executes L<xdg-launch(1)> with
the appropriate arguments (B<--toolwait>).
See L<xdg-launch(1)/COMMAND OPTIONS> for more information.

It provides a similar
behaviour to the L<xtoolwait(1)> utility, but also supports XDG
desktop applications.

B<xdg-toolwait> notably decreases the startup time of a desktop session
by reducing the load on the X server and the operating system.
B<xdg-toolwait> launches the desktop application or command in the
background.

When startup notification is supported by the application, it waits
until startup notification completes and exits.  When  startup
notification is not supported by the application, it waits until a
window is mapped on the root window and exits.  B<xdg-toolwait> also
exits if a time-out occurs (by default after 15 seconds), or if the
application or command exits.

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-toolwait>.
B<xdg-toolwait> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

All options supported by L<xdg-launch(1)> are supported; however, the
options also supported by L<xtoolwait(1)> are of interest here.  See
L<xdg-launch(1)> for full documentation of other options.

=over

=item B<-display> I<DISPLAY>

Monitor the X display, I<DISPLAY>, for window mapping events.  If this
optiopn is not used, the X display defaults to the value of the
C<DISPLAY> environment variable.

=item B<-timeout> I<NSECONDS>

Use a time-out period of I<NSECONDS> seconds.  If this option is not
used, the time-out period defaults to 15 seconds.

=item B<-mappings> I<NWINDOWS>

Exit after I<NWINDOWS> windows have been mapped, instead of the default
of one window.  Use this option only if you are absolutely sure that the
application or command will map I<NWINDOWS> top-level windows, in which
case it will slightly increase the performance.

=item B<-withdrawn>

Consider windows in the C<WithdrawnState> as mapped.  This causes the
expected behaviour when starting Window Maker dockapps.

=item B<-pid>

Print the process id (pid) of the application or command to standard
output.  This option is useful for shell scripts that want to wait for
(or send a signal to) the application or command.  To support shell
command substitution (`command`), B<xdg-toolwait> redirects the standard
output of the application or command to standard error.

=item B<-wid>

Print the id of the found X window to standard output, for use with
tools like L<wmctrl(1)> or L<xdotool(1)>.  To support shell command
substitution (`command`), B<xdg-toolwait> redirects the standard output
of the application or command to standard error.

=item B<-noprop>

Workaround for non-compliant window managers.  Try this if
B<xdg-toolwait> fails to detect when its child process creates a window.
Normally, B<xdg-toolwait> waits for the window manager to send at least
one C<PropertyNotify> event for each new window so that it doesn't react
until the window has been mapped and positioned (at which an ICCCM 2.0
compliant window manager usually sets the C<WM_STATE> property on the
window).  This flag causes B<xdg-toolwait> to consider a window to have
been fully created as soon as it receives a C<CreateNotify> event.

=item B<-help>

Print out the usage command syntax summary.

=item B<-version>

Print out the version number.

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-toolwait> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xdg-launch(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
