=pod

=head1 NAME

 xdg-icon - command-line XDG icon lookup tool

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 xdg-icon [ OPTIONS ] [NAME[ NAME ...]]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xdg-icon> is a command line tool for looking up icons in accordance
with the XDG icon specification.


=head1 ARGUMENTS

The program accepts the following arguments:

=over

=item I<NAME>[,I<NAME>][ I<NAME> ...]

B<xdg-icon> treats all non-option arguments as a list of alternate icon
names to seek.  Each non-option argument may itself be a list of
comma-separated icon names.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

B<xdg-icon> accepts the following options:

=over

=item B<--help>,B<-h>

Print usage information and then exit.

=item B<--verbose>,B<-v>

Print the parameters of the search to standard error before searching.

=item B<--theme>,B<-t> I<THEME>

Specify the default theme, I<THEME>, to use when lookup up icons.  The
default theme when unspecified will be looked up from normal sources.

=item B<--size>,B<-s> I<SIZE>

Specify the preferred size of the icon, I<SIZE>.  The default size when
unspecified is 16.

=item B<--icon>,B<--name>,B<-n> I<NAME>[,I<NAME>]

Specify a comma separated list of alternate icon names to look up in
addition to any non-option arguments.  The option may be repeated or
specified using non-option arguments.

=item B<--extensions>,B<-e> I<EXTENSION>[,I<EXTENSION>]

Specify a comma separated list of file name extensions, I<EXTENSION>,
(without the '.') that may be returned.  The order of preference is the
order specified.  This option may be repeated.

=item B<--append>,B<-a> I<DIRECTORY>[:I<DIRECTORY>]

Specify the colon-separated list of directories to append to the list of
search directories (in the order specified).  This option may be
repeated to list additional directories to append.

=item B<--prepend>,B<-a> I<DIRECTORY>[:I<DIRECTORY>]

Specify the colon-separated list of directories to prepend to the list
of search directories (in the order specified).  This option may be
repeated to list additional directories to prepend.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

The following example will look up the 32x32 icon named C<start-here> in
the theme C<Mist>.  If not found, the icon named C<unknown> will be
looked up before resorting to fallback locations.

 xdg-icon --theme Mist --size 32 start-here unknown

=head1 HISTORY

I wrote B<xdg-icon> because there were no command line tools for
determining which icon would be used by XDG compliant tools (such as
L<Gtk2(3pm)>).

The modules used by this tool are also used by L<xdg-menugen(1p)> for
when generating menus for XDE supported window managers.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<XDG Icon Specification>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
