=pod

=head1 NAME

xdg-autostart - an XDG compliant autostart startup notification launcher

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xdg-autostart> [I<OPTIONS>] [I<APPID> [I<FILE>|I<URL>]]

B<xdg-autostart> [I<OPTIONS>] -c I<command and arguments>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-autostart> is a program that establishes a simple X session
utilizing L<xdg-launch(1)>.  It performs the autostart procedure
specified in the L<XDG Desktop Specification> and then launches the
specified window manager.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

B<xdg-autostart> accepts the following arguments:

=over

=item I<APPID>

Specifies the application identifier of an XDG desktop application to
launch as the window manager.  This must be an X session application id.
The application id, I<APPID>, can be one of the following:

=over

=item 1.

The name of an X session desktop entry file without the F<.desktop>
suffix (e.g. F<blackbox>); the name may contain a C</> if it is
specified relative to a user or system X session directory, in which
case it must not start with a C</> or C<.>.

=item 2.

The name of a desktop entry file with the F<.desktop> suffix (e.g.
F<blackbox.desktop>); the same restrictions as (1), above, apply; or,

=item 3.

The full path (absolute or relative) and filename of a desktop entry
file (e.g. F</usr/share/xsessions/backbox.desktop>); the full path must
contain at least one C</> and start with either a C</> or a C<.>.

=back

The application identifier, I<APPID>, can alternately be specified as an
option argument using the B<--appid> option.

=back

=item I<FILE>

Specifies the file name with which to launch the X session.  This is
used in C<%f> substitutions in the C<Exec> field of the XDG desktop
entry file or B<--exec> command line.  This may also be specified with
the B<--file> option.

=item I<URL>

Specifies the URL with which to launch the X session.  This is used in
C<%u> substitutions in the C<Exec> field of the XDG desktop entry file
or B<--exec> command line.  This may also be specified with the B<--url>
option.

=back

Arguments are optional and can either be specified using command line
options; or, when unspecified, no window manager will be launched and
B<xdg-autostart> will simply return after performing the auto start
procedure.

=head1 ENVIRONNMENT

B<xdg-autostart> does not set up nor establish any environment variables
of its own.  It examines common environment variables and XDG
specification environment variables.  The following environment
variables are examined:

=over

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xdg-autostart> has no known bugs.
Please report bugs to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xdg-launch/issues>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xdg-launch(1)>,
L<XDG Desktop Specification>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
